# General information

Rune Halvorsen, 2025-01-20

The course [BIOS5210/BIOS9210](https://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ibv/BIOS5210/index-eng.html), ‘Methods of gradient analysis’, consists of a series of lectures and practicals that support the learning goal, to give the participants a basic understanding of the methods used for multivariate gradient analysis of ecological data. Ordination methods are the main focus of the course, but we also address constrained ordination and analysis of spatial structure.

BIOS5210/BIOS9210 addresses both the MSc (BIOS5210) and PhD (BIOS9210) levels in one course, i.e., with one set of lectures and practicals. The difference between BIOS5210 and BIOS9210 is primarily with respect to the required reading and exams.

In its present form, BIOS5210/BIOS9210 is the result of a long iteration process that started in 1982 when I taught my first course in multivariate methods in plant ecology. For many years, the course was given as a five-day intensive course. Over the years, the course has been restructured and expanded several times. In its present shape, the course consists of a two-day optional pre-course and a seven-day intensive course. The course is taught at the Natural History Museum (Tøyen), in the Auditorium of the Botanical Museum building (Lid’s hus). Every day, teaching starts at 9:15. You are supposed to bring your own computer for the practicals.

Some background in classic statistics (and, of course, some knowledge of community ecology) is essential to follow the course. The two-day pre-course contains the very essentials of community ecology and univariate statistics on which gradient analysis is based. A large number of important, basic (bio)statistical concepts and methods are reviewed, most of which should be well known to most of you. Nevertheless, my experience is that when the course starts, many students have an obscure, or at least a distant, relationship to these topics. In order for all participants to be ‘fit for fight’ when the course starts on Wednesday, March 5th, I encourage all of you, regardless whether you will attend the pre-course or not, to read lectures 0a and 0b carefully before your first day on the course! 

BIOS5210/BIOS9210 is based upon free R software, which contains the most extensive library of statistical tools available. R is taught in basic courses in ecology and biostatistics at the UiO. Although answers to almost all R questions can be found on the Internet, some of you may still be old-fashioned enough to like having a good basic R textbook within reach. There are many to choose among; my favourite is ‘Crawley, M. J. 2013. The R book, ed. 2. – Wiley, Chichester’, now in new edition: Jones, E., Harden, S. & Crawley, M.J. 2022. The R book, ed. 3. – Wiley, Chichester. Please note that knowledge of basis R syntax and familiarity with the use of R is almost a must to be able to do gradient analysis in practice as taught on BIOS5210/BIOS9210. If you lack training in R, you should definitively familiarise with R before the course starts. 
 
Because I am a vegetation ecologist by training, I will mainly use vegetation ecological examples during the course. However, the principles of gradient analysis relationships apply to many branches of science, also outside of ecology. Nevertheless, I assume that the participants have some basic knowledge of general (vegetation) ecology and of standard statistical methods (estimation and testing, regression modelling, correlation analysis, etc.). As mentioned above, a brief overview and refreshment of this background knowledge is provided in the pre-course. 

The major emphasis in BIOS5210/BIOS9210 is on theory and usage of ordination and constrained ordination methods, the two main families of multivariate gradient analytic tools. The principles of ordination methodology, including the algorithms of PCA, CA, DCA and NMDS, are explained in sufficient detail for the participants to understand how the methods work and their limitations. The performance of the methods for practical ecological problems, given the inherent limitations of data that never completely fulfil the basic statistical assumptions of the methods, is particularly emphasised. Methods for ecological interpretation of ordination results are explained and exemplified. The principles of constrained ordination methods are explained and the differences in scope between ordination and constrained methods are emphasised. An introduction to geostatistical methods is given, and the use of these methods in interpretation of spatial aspects of biological and ecological variation is demonstrated. I need to mention that, in recent years, there has been a considerable proliferation of statistical techniques of relevance for gradient analysis (e.g., see Dray, S., Pélissier, R., Couteron, P., Fortin, M.-J., Legendre, P., Peres-Neto, P.R., Bellier, E., Bivand, R., Blanchet, F.G., De Cáceres, M., Dufour, A.-B., Heegaard, E., Jombart, T., Munoz, F., Oksanen, J., Thioulouse, J. & Wagner, H.H. 2012. Community ecology in the age of multivariate multiscale spatial analysis. – Ecol. Monogr. 82: 257–275.) and that, after some decades with little progress, new and potentially powerful approaches are emerging (e.g., see van der Veen, B., Hui, F.K.C., Hovstad, K.A., Solbu, E.B. & O'Hara, R.B. 2021. Model-based ordination for species with unequal niche widths. ‒ Meth. Ecol. Evol. 12: 1288-1300; van der Veen, B., O'Hara, R.B., Hui, F.K.C. & Hovstad, K.A. 2024. Predicting niche overlap with model-based ordination. ‒ Ecography 2024: e06938: 1-10.) BIOS5210/BIOS9210 does not by far cover all of these methods; the course rather aims at providing a platform for those who want to dive deeper into the increasing diversity of methods for gradient analysis.

The main **learning goals of the course** can be summarised as follows:

* to achieve a good understanding of the theory that underpins the use of multivariate statistical methods in ecological sciences.
* to understand how the most commonly used multivariate techniques (PCA, CA, DCA and GNMDS ordination, and RDA and CCA constrained ordination) work.
* to achieve practical skills in multivariate gradient analysis with R.
* to develop the participants' critical attitude to the use of multivariate gradient analytic methods, and skills in evaluation of results of such analyses.

The focus of BIOS5210 is to ensure that the participants understand what the gradient analysis methods do with (their) data. The oral exam (which will be different for BIOS5210 and BIOS9210) will reflect this, by being entirely theoretical. I hope it will become clear after the data labs that performing gradient analyses on the computer is (mostly) very simple once the theory is understood. For most users, the application of R (and, in particular, the ‘vegan’ package made by Jari Oksanen of Oulu university) for this purpose no longer offers practical difficulties (also numerous other packages are relevant, e.g.: akima, mgcv, stats, geoR, ggplot2, base, lattice ...).
 
Those of you who want to install or become more familiar with R may consult the R homepage, http://mirrors.dotsrc.org/cran/, from which you can download the program for free and obtain tonnes (or, at least, many megabytes) of information! The manual for vegan, the core R package to be used on the course, can be found on https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vegan/vegan.pdf. 

Gradient analysis, like most other ecological applications of statistical techniques, face the problem that the data do not comply with the demands set by the methods, for independence of observations, for data sets to have specific distributional properties, etc. Perhaps the most important learning goal for BIOS5210/BIOS9210 is to make the participants critical users of statistical methods. I summarised some thoughts over this important theme in a paper published in the journal Folia geobotanica in 2007. A pdf copy of this paper can be found in the ’Background’ folder on the Canvas webpage for the course. 

You are encouraged to bring your own data as well as all of your previous experience with methods of gradient analysis to the course. Own data are, of course, not mandatory. Several data sets will be made available for course exercises.

In 2017 I introduced a novel element in the course as a result of suggestions by participants of the 2016 course: a full data set (‘Data set X’) with vegetation plots and associated environmental variables. During the course, as new methods are introduced, Data set X may be used for a ‘general-purpose vegetation ecological study’ by adaptation of the supplied R scripts. My original plan (in 2017) was to discuss results of the analyses of Data set X at the end of the course. However, to my experience, Data set X has not been used by any student at any of the 2017 to 2024 courses (but someone may have used it to prepare for the final exam)! I nevertheless offer you Data set X this year, if some of you should like to try the methods on a full dataset that is not used for the ordinary lab exercises! I have prepared a generalised script for this (P_GeneralScriptOrdination.R) for this, with the additional purpose to serve as your template when, later on, you shall develop a script adapted to your analysis of own data. This script now comes in two versions, a 'classic' version and a 'revised' version by Thijs Christiaan van Son, which includes options for nice graphics by use of the ggplot package. Updated versions of the scripts will be prepared before the course starts.

The **oral exam** (exact date and time will be fixed near the end of the course) will be based on the powerpoint lecture presentations L1–10. These presentations are, however, only a summary of topics that are addressed in the lectures. A more in-depth basic explanation of the main methods covered can be found on pp. 116–174 of my booklet from 1990 (Økland, R.H. 1990. Vegetation ecology: theory, methods and applications with reference to Fennoscandia. – Sommerfeltia Supplement 1: 1–233), and in many other books and papers; see separate file with relevant references. The textbook on gradient analytic methods by use of R by Borcard et al. (2011) provides a more updated treatise. This textbook is available to UiO personnel on the net, and I have therefore downloaded it together with my 1990 book in a ’textbook’ folder. These two books are meant as supplementary reading, as they cover the topics taught at the course only partly. As you will learn during the course, opinions on many aspects of gradient analysis differ (often strongly) among researchers. Accordingly, some of the opinions expressed by these authors, as well as some of my own, are controversial!

The course language is English, as non-Norwegian speaking students attend the course every year. Since 2006 student presentations have been part of the course. This has been a success, both for the speakers and for the audience! Many students have got valuable feedback on their projects and ideas during these sessions. Thus, also on the 2025 course, you are invited to give a (short) presentation of a topic of your own choice (e.g., 15–20 min, but with opening for other arrangements), as a basis for discussion with the class. Your topic can be related to an ongoing MSc or PhD project based on your own research experience with gradient analytic methods (PhD students) or other, general or specific questions relating to gradient analysis that you’d like to address. Since this may require some preparation, e-mail me if you have questions (rune.halvorsen `at` nhm.uio.no).

## References
van Son, Thijs Christiaan, and Halvorsen, Rune. "Multiple Parallel Ordinations: the Importance of Choice of Ordination Method and Weighting of Species Abundance Data" Sommerfeltia, vol. 37, no. 1, Sciendo, 2014, pp. 1-37. https://doi.org/10.2478/som-2014-0001
